PLG-Motion | AutoGraph Flow Tutorial (#1061)
arangodb/docs-hugo: site/content/contextual-data-platform/tutorials/notebook-tutorial.md

{{< embed-svg "GraphRAG-Flow" "AutoGraph end-to-end flow." >}}

## Step 1: Check the prerequisites

Confirm you have everything before you start; the rest of this tutorial assumes
all of it is in place.

- **Arango Contextual Data Platform 4.0+** (which ships with **ArangoDB 3.12.9**
  or later) with the Agentic AI Suite enabled, reachable from where you run the
  notebook.
- **A running Notebook server** in that platform. This tutorial is designed to
  run in the platform's integrated
  [Notebook servers](../../agentic-ai-suite/notebook-servers.md), where network
  access and Python are already set up. You can also run it from any local
  Jupyter environment that can reach the platform endpoint.
- **Platform credentials** - a username and password with permission to create
  projects and deploy services.
- **LLM and embedding API access** - this tutorial uses OpenAI-compatible
  endpoints and an API key. Any OpenAI-compatible provider works.
- **A folder of documents** to ingest, in one of the
  [supported file formats](../../agentic-ai-suite/autograph/setup.md#supported-file-formats).
  To reproduce this tutorial exactly, download the ready-made sample corpus

>   [`corpus.zip`](/notebooks/corpus.zip) (50 short tech articles); unzipping it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `corpus.zip` (50 short tech articles); unzipping it
```

  produces a `files/` folder.
- **The notebook file**: download

>   [`Autograph_DEMO.ipynb`](/notebooks/Autograph_DEMO.ipynb).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `Autograph_DEMO.ipynb`.
```

{{< tip >}}
For large-scale ingestion of PDF and Office documents, GPUs are recommended.
Ingestion of those formats on CPU-only clusters can be slow even for small
document sets.
{{< /tip >}}

## Step 2: Open the notebook

Open the notebook in a Notebook server so that this page becomes your guide to
what each cell does, rather than something you copy from.

1. In the Arango Contextual Data Platform web interface, expand **AI Tools** in
   the main navigation and click **Notebook servers**.
2. Create a notebook server, or open an existing one, and click its ID to open
   the Jupyter interface. For details, see
   [Notebook servers](../../agentic-ai-suite/notebook-servers.md).

> 3. Download [`Autograph_DEMO.ipynb`](/notebooks/Autograph_DEMO.ipynb), upload it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Download `Autograph_DEMO.ipynb, upload it
```

   into the file browser, and open it.
4. Put the documents you want to ingest in a `files/` folder next to the
   notebook. To use the sample corpus, download

>    [`corpus.zip`](/notebooks/corpus.zip) and unzip it here - it expands to a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `corpus.zip` and unzip it here - it expands to a
```

---
title: Build a Context Graph with AutoGraph from a Jupyter notebook
menuTitle: Notebook Tutorial
weight: 18
description: >-

>   A hands-on tutorial that takes you from a folder of documents to a queryable

Reviewer 2: I would wish for a short paragraph purely on the problem space here:
Why should I do this tutorial?
What is the value I would get out of the Product?

Try to keep this low tech and non-arango specific.

I am not doing this tutorial because I want to run some commands and python code.
I am doing this because I have problem to solve, and I want to understand if this Product helps me solve the problem.

>   Context Graph, driving the full AutoGraph pipeline from a Jupyter notebook

Reviewer 2: We should double check if "AutoGraph" is in-line with official naming still.
https://arangodb.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/TUP/pages/3652780035/AutoGraph+Studio+Naming+2026-07-21

If I see this correctly this may be the "AutoGraph Studio" pipeline.

AFAIK AutoGraph stops at "you have a graph"
AutoRAG starts at "you want to ask the graph"
Both combined is AutoGraph Studio?

Reviewer 2: This comment applies to more than one mention in this Document

  with Python and the HTTP REST API
---
In this tutorial, we go from a folder of raw documents to a queryable **Context
Graph** using AutoGraph, driving every step from a Jupyter notebook. We run the
ready-made `Autograph_DEMO.ipynb` notebook cell by cell in a platform Notebook
server, meeting each service that AutoGraph orchestrates along the way: the
Secrets Manager for the LLM key, the File Manager for the documents, the corpus
build that clusters them, the RAG Strategizer that picks a retrieval strategy,
and the retriever we deploy with AutoRAG and finally chat with.

This is the same workflow you would run in

> [AutoGraph Studio](../../agentic-ai-suite/autograph/web-interface.md), the

Reviewer 2: Ah here we mention AutoGraph Studio.

Is Studio only the UI for the Flow?
How is the Flow called then, if AutoGraph is one step of it only?

unified web interface, but here every step is a Python call against the
[HTTP REST API](../../agentic-ai-suite/autograph/reference/_index.md) - so you
can automate the pipeline, inspect intermediate results, and reuse the calls in
your own scripts.

> By the end, you will have:

Reviewer 2: puh I think the section below (and my comments on them)
feels a bit too low level.

Should we rewrite it a bit more "business value" focussed rather then "implementation focussed" ?

I would probably shrink this down to two points:

* A *context graph* generated from the uploaded files. Making the information in those files accessible for AI Agents.
* One *AutoRAG* instance, an Agent using the *context graph* to reason about your (private) document dataset.

Reviewer 2: i am missing "AutoGraph" in my own Comment.
Is the "Context Graph" and AutoGraph actually the same?
I would prefer Context Graph though.

> - An AutoGraph service deployed on the platform, configured with your LLM.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- An AutoRAG service deployed on the platform, configured with your LLM. Allowing you to have an Agent reason about your documents.
```

> - Your documents uploaded through the File Manager and embedded into a Corpus Graph.

Reviewer 2: Do i as user really care about this?

my goal is to ask Questions.

IMO I would remove this entry

```suggestion
```

- A per-domain RAG strategy chosen automatically for your content.
- A Knowledge Graph built by the orchestrated GraphRAG importers - together with
  the Corpus Graph, this is your **Context Graph**.
- A running retriever, deployed with AutoRAG, that you can query in natural language.

> - A simple way to remove everything when you are done.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This is not a highlight ;)

The **Expected output** blocks in this tutorial are illustrative - IDs, counts,
and generated text will differ on your run.

{{< embed-svg "GraphRAG-Flow" "AutoGraph end-to-end flow." >}}

{{< info >}}

> The **Context Graph** is everything AutoGraph builds for a project. It is made

Reviewer 2: 🤔 do I (as a consumer) care about this information here?

I have not yet done anything and I am bombarded with super deep technical details.

I would suggest to piece-meal this notes the following way:

We do the tutorial "half way" to the point where data is imported and "Context Graph" is built.
Then we add the Note here.
The user at that point could step out and implement their own agent to query the raw data (I would not mention this explicitly here but that is a logical exit point)

And setup for the next Chapter:
Now we learn how to access the data using "AutoRAG" ...

of two graphs that keep their names: the **Corpus Graph** (how your documents
are organized into clusters and modules) and the **Knowledge Graph** (the
entities, relations, and communities extracted inside each partition). AutoGraph

> builds the Context Graph; you then use **AutoRAG** to deploy retrievers over it.

Reviewer 2: Isn't AutoRAG the Retriever?

{{< /info >}}

## Step 1: Check the prerequisites

Confirm you have everything before you start; the rest of this tutorial assumes
all of it is in place.

- **Arango Contextual Data Platform 4.0+** (which ships with **ArangoDB 3.12.9**
  or later) with the Agentic AI Suite enabled, reachable from where you run the
  notebook.
- **A running Notebook server** in that platform. This tutorial is designed to
  run in the platform's integrated
  [Notebook servers](../../agentic-ai-suite/notebook-servers.md), where network
  access and Python are already set up. You can also run it from any local

>   Jupyter environment that can reach the platform endpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Arango Contextual Data Platform 4.0**
1. You can get an evaluation license here <link to PLG website>
2. Here is how to start it: <link to Startup tutorial>
```

Please let us make Jupyter Notebook part of the Process and make it a setup step (e.g. by linking to the setup tutorial, or with (some) screenshot(s).
Ideally I user can do the Startup Tutorial and then continue here. Making the Notebook Server a requirement kind of blocks the flow.

- **Platform credentials** - a username and password with permission to create
  projects and deploy services.
- **LLM and embedding API access** - this tutorial uses OpenAI-compatible
  endpoints and an API key. Any OpenAI-compatible provider works.
- **A folder of documents** to ingest, in one of the
  [supported file formats](../../agentic-ai-suite/autograph/setup.md#supported-file-formats).
  To reproduce this tutorial exactly, download the ready-made sample corpus
  `corpus.zip` (50 short tech articles); unzipping it

>   produces a `files/` folder.

Reviewer 2: Just mention the curios.zip here.
The tutorial should guide you through one example.

At then end you can open up with:
If you want to use your own documents now, here are the supported file formats. Drop the graph and start from scratch using your documents now.

- **The notebook file**: download
  `Autograph_DEMO.ipynb`.

{{< tip >}}
For large-scale ingestion of PDF and Office documents, GPUs are recommended.
Ingestion of those formats on CPU-only clusters can be slow even for small
document sets.
{{< /tip >}}

> ## Step 2: Open the notebook

Reviewer 2: As this is all UI based.
I would like to have screenshots for the steps.

> Open the notebook in a Notebook server so that this page becomes your guide to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will now open the notebook in a Notebook server so that this page becomes your guide to
```

In your variant I would consider this a "call to action" and try to open a Notebook server by myself.
And then I get the steps on how to do it.

what each cell does, rather than something you copy from.

1. In the Arango Contextual Data Platform web interface, expand **AI Tools** in

>    the main navigation and click **Notebook servers**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   the main navigation. **Notebook servers** should now be selected.
```

> 2. Create a notebook server, or open an existing one, and click its ID to open

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Create a notebook server and click its ID to open
```

Reviewer 2: The tutorial should focus on blank state.

> 2. Create a notebook server, or open an existing one, and click its ID to open

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Create a notebook server (**New notebook server**), or open an existing one, and click its ID to open
```

> 2. Create a notebook server, or open an existing one, and click its ID to open

Reviewer 2: Please mention here: Creating one notebook takes a while.
When clicking on it you will see:
**Notebook Not Available**
The Notebook service is not currently available or not configured in this environment.

--

You get this message in the UI when starting:
Although it has been created, it may take a few minutes to be ready to use.

--

I did not expect this to take long.
So I tried to start a second one to get a timing.
This is not reachable for 13+ min already.
I will redo the timing experiment one a fresh cluster, to exclude side-effects with the already running one I had.
But for 13 minutes we need to distract the user somehow...

   the Jupyter interface. For details, see
   [Notebook servers](../../agentic-ai-suite/notebook-servers.md).

> 3. Download `Autograph_DEMO.ipynb, upload it

Reviewer 2: I do not understand this step.
Screenshot would help.

I think it should be:
"Drag & drop" the file into the Jupyter Interface, into the Navigation Area on the left.

   into the file browser, and open it.

> 4. Put the documents you want to ingest in a `files/` folder next to the

Reviewer 2: Only explain how to work with the given corpus.zip

>    notebook. To use the sample corpus, download

Reviewer 2: Okay i do not understand this.

Where do I upload the corpus?
Should I extract on my local file system and upload files?
Should I upload the zip?
Do I need to have a specific name of the folder or file?

Reviewer 2: Okay, looking at it later.
It should be:
unzip the corpus, which will create a folder called "files" upload the folder, such that on the Notebook server we have a folder "files" directly containing the .md files.

   `corpus.zip` and unzip it here - it expands to a
   ready-made `files/` folder of 50 articles.

Run the cells **top to bottom**, one at a time. Do not use **Run All**: the
corpus build, the RAG Strategizer, and the orchestration run in the background,
so you re-run each status cell until it reports the stage is finished before
continuing to the next one.

{{< info >}}

> The notebook defines its own HTTP helpers (`authenticate`, `send_request`,

Reviewer 2: 🤔 I would probably not put this here.
If we allow it to run on an outside Jupyter server, then people would need to adjust the address etc.

For this Tutorial we assume it is running inside the Arango deployment.
And the defaults on the Notebook should work without any adjustments by the user.

Reviewer 2: I would be okay to add this tip at the step where we are creating a Notebook Server in the following way:

If you want to use your own Notebook server, you can do it. But then you need to change the following cells in the Provided Notebook to adjust Arango Connection. <explain what to change>

`start_service`, `stop_service`, and `ag_request`), so it runs from any Jupyter
environment, including one outside the platform. The only packages it needs are
`python-dotenv` and `requests`; the first cell installs both.
{{< /info >}}

## Step 3: Configure platform and LLM access

The notebook reads your platform, database, credentials, and files from a file,
so you point it at your environment in one place rather than by editing those
values in code cells. The LLM provider and models are set separately, in the
deployment cell in Step 7 (pre-filled for OpenAI).

Create a file named `env` in the same directory as the notebook and fill in your
own values:

```sh

> SERVER_URL = "https://<EXTERNAL_ENDPOINT>:8529"

Reviewer 2: Please make this copy&paste for the local instance.

> SERVER_URL = "https://<EXTERNAL_ENDPOINT>:8529"

Reviewer 2: My suggestion:
Comment this out and say "only use this if you run on an external Notebook server"

Then we need to change the notebook to set `SERVER_URL = os.environ["ARANGODB_ENDPOINT"]` before loading the environment file

USERNAME = "root"
PASSWORD = "<your-password>"

> DB_NAME = "your-database"

Reviewer 2: Should be _system here

> PROJECT_NAME = "your-autograph-project"

Reviewer 2: Just fix one, like "AutoGraph-tutorial"

LLM_API_KEY = "sk-..."
FILES_PATH = "./files"
```

Each value is used as follows:

| Variable | Purpose |
|---|---|

> | `SERVER_URL` | Base URL of your platform gateway (port `8529`). |

Reviewer 2: Please only set this if running an external Jupiter server.

| `USERNAME` / `PASSWORD` | Platform credentials used to obtain the access token. |

> | `DB_NAME` | The ArangoDB database that holds the project, documents, and Context Graph. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `DB_NAME` | The ArangoDB database where we want to store the Context Graph|
```

> | `PROJECT_NAME` | The GenAI project name. It becomes the prefix for all collections AutoGraph creates (for example, `your-project_sources`, `your-project_domains`). |

Reviewer 2: Please use the above selected name for examples here.
